# migrating from gitosis to gitolite

Migrating from gitosis to gitolite is pretty easy, because the basic design is
the same.  The differences are:

  * gitolite does not use a special repo for the configuration, pubkeys, etc.
    You can choose to version that directory but it is not required that you
    do so

Here's how we migrated my work repos (note: substitute real paths, from your
`~/.gitolite.rc`, for `$REPO_BASE` and `$GL_ADMINDIR` below):

1.  login as the `git` user on the server, and get a bash shell prompt

2.  **disable gitosis** by renaming `/usr/bin/gitosis-serve` to something
    else.  This will prevent users from pushing anything while you do the
    backup, migration, etc.

3.  For added safety, **delete** the post-update hook that gitosis-admin
    installed

        rm $REPO_BASE/gitosis-admin.git/hooks/post-update

    or at least rename it to `.sample` like all the other hooks hanging
    around, or edit it and comment out the line that calls `gitosis-run-hook
    post-update`.

    If you do not do this, an accidental push to the gitosis-admin repo will
    mess up your `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` file

4.  take a **backup** of the `$REPO_BASE` directory

5.  untar gitolite to some temporary directory and follow the instructions to
    **install** it using `src/install.pl`

6.  **convert** your gitosis config file:

        cd $GL_ADMINDIR
        src/conf-convert.pl < ~/.gitosis.conf > conf/gitolite.conf

    be sure to check the file to make sure it converted correctly

7.  **copy** the update hook to each of the existing repos (if you have repos
    in subdirectories, this won't work as is; adapt it):

        for i in $REPO_BASE/*.git
        do
            cp src/update-hook.pl $i/hooks/update
        done

8.  **copy** the keys from gitosis's keydir

        cp $REPO_BASE/gitosis-admin.git/gitosis-export/keydir/* keydir

9.  **Important: expand** any multi-key files you may have.  See the "faq,
    tips, etc" document in the doc directory for an explanation of what
    multi-keys are, how gitosis does them and how gitolite does it
    differently.

    You can split the keys manually, or use the following code (just
    copy-paste it into your xterm):

        cd $GL_ADMINDIR
        wc -l keydir/*.pub | grep -v total | grep -v -w 1 | while read a b
        do
            i=1
            cat $b|while read l
            do
                echo "$l" > ${b%.pub}@$i.pub
                (( i++ ))
            done
            mv $b $b.done
        done

    This will split each multi-key file (say "sitaram.pub") into individual
    files called "sitaram@1.pub", "sitaram@2.pub", etc., and rename the
    original to "sitaram.pub.done" so gitolite won't pick it up.

    At this point you can rename the split parts more appropriately, like
    "sitaram@laptop.pub" and "sitaram@desktop.pub" or whatever.  *Please check
    the files to make sure this worked properly*

10. **edit** `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` and **carefully** remove all the lines
    containing "gitosis-serve", as well as the marker line that says
    "auto-generated by gitosis, DO NOT REMOVE", then save the file.  If the
    file did not have any other keys and is now empty, don't worry -- save it
    anyway because gitolite expects the file to be present (even if it is
    empty).

At this point you're ready to "compile" the configuration.  See the "admin"
document for what to do, and how to check the outputs, etc.
