## #g2rcdiff rc file differences between g2 and g3

The new rc file has far fewer variables; many have been dropped.  You should
not see much ill effect though, but please read below.

### #rc-preset pre-setting the rc file

Some of these settings are such that you cannot directly run `gitolite setup`
when you're ready to migrate.  Instead, you need to run

    # (assuming you saved your g2 rc file somewhere)
    gitolite print-default-rc > $HOME/.gitolite.rc
    $EDITOR $HOME/.gitolite.rc
    # make appropriate changes (see below), save
    gitolite setup

The most serious example of this is `GL_NO_SETUP_AUTHKEYS`.  If you don't
preset the rc (in this case, by commenting out the 'ssh-authkeys' line)
**before** running `gitolite setup`, your `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` file will
get clobbered.

There are several other settings that you may want to look at, with varying
degrees of severity; **please go through the list below before blindly running
`gitolite setup`**.  (For example, if you had `GL_NO_DAEMON_NO_GITWEB` in g2
but forgot to comment out all the gitweb and daemon update lines in the rc
file, your projects.list and git-daemon-export-ok files might get clobbered.
Of course this is less severe than ssh authkeys but still...).

### rc file differences

**DROPPED** variables (possible high impact): these could be show-stoppers for
migration, at least for now.

  * `BIG_INFO_CAP` -- if you think you must have this, try it without and see
    if there's a difference.  If you *know* you need this, convince me.

  * `GL_ALL_READ_ALL` -- same

  * `GL_NO_CREATE_REPOS` -- if you think you need this, email me.  I know one
    group who does need this so I will be putting it in eventually but not
    right away.

  * `HTPASSWD_FILE`, `RSYNC_BASE`, `SVNSERVE` -- need work.  Email me if you
    are using any of these.

  * `GL_GET_MEMBERSHIPS_PGM` -- is high on my todo list

  * `GL_LOGT` -- is now fixed; you can't change it.  Email me if this is a
    problem.

**DROPPED** variables (medium impact): these have alternative implementations
or mechanisms, but you have to do some setup work.

  * `GL_ADMINDIR` -- this is now at a fixed location: `~/.gitolite`.  If you
    want it somewhere else go ahead and move it, then place a symlink from the
    assumed location to the real one.

  * `REPO_BASE` -- this is now at a fixed location: `~/repositories`.  If you
    want it somewhere else go ahead and move it, then place a symlink from the
    assumed location to the real one.

  * `PROJECTS_LIST` -- it's called `GITWEB_PROJECTS_LIST` now, but more
    importantly, it is only used by update-gitweb-access-list in
    src/commands/post-compile.  This variable now has nothing to do with
    gitolite core, and the rc is just helping to store settings for external
    programs like that one.

    `WEB_INTERFACE` and `GITWEB_URI_ESCAPE` are also gone; patches to the
    update program to directly do those things are welcome.  Personally, I
    think people who use spaces and other funky characters in dir/file names
    should be shot but luckily no one listens to me :-)

  * `GL_NO_DAEMON_NO_GITWEB` -- uncomment the appropriate lines in the rc
    file, in both the `POST_COMPILE` and `POST_CREATE` trigger sections.

  * `NICE_VALUE` -- uncomment the 'renice 10' line in the rc file.  You can
    also change the 10 to something else if you wish.

  * `GIT_PATH` -- gone, not needed.  Just add these lines to the end of the rc
    file:

        $ENV{PATH}="...whatever you want...";
        1;

  * `GL_NO_SETUP_AUTHKEYS` -- comment out the lines that call ssh-authkeys, in
    the rc file.

  * `GL_WILDREPOS_DEFPERMS` -- if you need this, add a `POST_CREATE` script
    that does it.  Or email me and I will write it for you.

  * `UPDATE_CHAINS_TO` -- use a [vref][] instead.  You can directly use the
    chained-to script as a VREF; it'll work.

  * `ADMIN_POST_UPDATE_CHAINS_TO` -- add your script to the `POST_COMPILE`
    trigger chain.  You won't be getting any arguments but for the admin repo
    the only argument that ever comes in is "refs/heads/master" anyway.

  * `GL_ADC_PATH` -- obsolete; use [commands][] or add [your own][dev-notes].

  * `GL_ALL_INCLUDES_SPECIAL` -- obsolete; @all always includes gitweb and
    daemon now.  Use [deny-rules][] if you want to say `R = @all` but not have
    it be visible to gitweb or daemon.

  * `GL_PERFLOGT` -- see the entry for "gl-time" in the [alternative
    implementations][g2alt] page.

**DROPPED** variables (no impact/low impact): these variables should not
actually affect anything anyway, so even if you had them set you should not
feel their loss.

  * `GL_CONF`, `GL_KEYDIR`, and `GL_CONF_COMPILED` -- you had no business
    touching these anyway; if you did, move them into the expected default
    locations before attempting to run `gitolite setup`
  * `GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS` -- not needed anymore, but check if you had any custom
    hooks set there and copy them across.
  * `GL_WILDREPOS` -- dropped; this feature is default now.
  * `GL_BIG_CONFIG` -- dropped; this feature is default now.

**RENAMED** variables (no impact): these are functionally the same but are
renamed.

  * `REPO_UMASK` is now `UMASK`
  * `GL_GITCONFIG_KEYS` is now `GITCONFIG_KEYS`
  * `GL_WILDREPOS_PERM_CATS` is now the ROLES hash in the rc file
  * `GL_SITE_INFO` is now `SITE_INFO`
