# gitolite.conf -- by example

I hate people who make statements like "I dont have time to learn".  People
with that sort of attitude shouldn't use gitolite at all, and I refuse to
spoon-feed them or be their personal tutor.

However, it's possible that even with the right attitude and willingness to
learn, some people just get a mental block about something, and so I figure
this might help.

(Side note: followup questions not welcome from people in the former category;
you know who you are).

**WARNING 1**: in case of conflict between this document and reality, reality
wins.  For conflict between this document and the [main document][conf], the
main document wins.  In any case, please bring such issues to my notice.

**WARNING 2**: this document has examples only for the most commonly used
features.  If you don't find a feature here, look in the main document before
asking me.

**WARNING 3**: Read the WHOLE document.  I can't keep saying, for instance,
that "rewind" actually means any of 3 different things so I'll say it only
once.  It's upto you to have read that part also.

[conf]: http://sitaramc.github.com/gitolite/doc/gitolite.conf.html

----

[[TOC]]

----

### general notes

Git branch/tag name **recap**: branches look like refs/heads/something, tags
look like refs/tags/something.  When there is no ambiguity, we leave out the
refs/heads/ and the refs/tags/.

A "rewind" means any of 3 things: force-push a branch (make it go backward,
using 'git push -f' or equivalent), delete a branch, or update a tag.  The
first two are clearly information-losing operations so it is wise to require
special rights to do them.  The third is in the same category because tags are
supposed to be "write once" so **re**-writing a tag is considered abnormal.

These examples are only for the more complex parts of the conf file.  We're
not going to discuss things like what characters are allowed in a username or
reponame, how to write a comment line, how to write continuation lines (you
can't), include files, and all such *lexical* issues.

### extremely brief regex overview

Regexes are powerful.  Gitolite uses that power as much as it can.  If you
can't handle that power, hire someone who can and become a manager.

That said, here's a very quick overview of the highlights.

`^` and `$` are called "anchors".  They anchor the match to the beginning and
end of the string respectively.

    ^foo    matches any string starting with 'foo'
    foo$    matches any string ending with 'foo'
    ^foo$   matches exact string 'foo'.

To be precise, the last one is "any string starting and ending with *the same*
'foo'".  (Without the italicised phrase, it could mean "foofoo" would also
match, but it doesn't).

`[0-9]` is an example of a character class; this one matches any single digit.
`[a-z]` matches any lower case alpha.  For example, `[0-9a-f]` is the range of
hex characters.  You can guess what `[a-zA-Z0-9_]` does, then.

`.` (the period) is special -- it matches any character.  If you want to match
an actual period, you need to say `\.`.

`*`, `?`, and `+` are quantifiers.  They apply to the previous token.  `a*`
means "zero or more 'a' characters".  Similarly `a+` means "one or more", and
`a?` means "zero or one".

As a result, `.*` means "any number (including zero) of any character".

The previous token need not be a single character; you can use parens to make
it longer.  `(foo)+` matches one or more "foo", (like "foo", "foofoo",
"foofoofoo", etc.)

### basic access control

    repo    gitolite-admin
            RW+                 =   sitaram
            # this is equivalent to:
            RW+     refs/.*     =   sitaram

Sitaram is the only admin.  He can push, create, delete, or rewind any branch
or tag in the gitolite-admin repo.

    repo    testing
            RW+     =   @all

The 'testing' repo is a play area for everyone.  Anyone can do anything to any
branch or tag on it.

    repo    foo
            RW+     =   sitaram dilbert
            RW      =   alice ashok
            R       =   wally

Wally can only read the repo.  Alice and Ashok can push but not rewind; only
Sitaram and Dilbert can do that.

            R master    =   wally       # MEANINGLESS!  WONT DO WHAT YOU THINK IT DOES!!

This won't work.  You can only restrict "read" access at the repo level not
the branch level.  This is a git issue, not a gitolite issue.  Go bother them,
or switch to gerrit.

    repo    foo
            RW      master$             =   dilbert alice
            # this is equivalent to:
            RW      refs/heads/master$  =   dilbert alice

The reason for treating "master$" as "refs/heads/master$" is that  matching
branches is the most common use so we made it convenient to use.  Anything
*not* starting with `refs/` (or `NAME/`, but that is out of scope of this
document), is implicitly prefixed with `refs/heads/`).

The `master$` is called a "refex" (a regex that matches a ref).

Dilbert and Alice can push to the "master" branch.  Unless some other rule
allows it, they cannot push to, say, "master1", "masterfull" etc., due to the
`$` at the end of the refex.

This rule does not match "headmaster"; refexes are treated as if they have a
`^` at the start.  (This means `^refs/heads/master` in this case, not
`^master`, in case you forgot!)

            RW+     pu                  =   dilbert
            # again, remember this is equivalent to:
            RW+     refs/heads/pu       =   dilbert

Dilbert can push any branch whose name starts with "pu".  This includes "pu1",
"pupu", "pu/up", and so on, not just "pu".  This is because there is no `$` at
the end.

            RW      junk/               =   wally

Wally can push any branch under "junk/", which means "junk/foo", "junk/bar",
are ok but not "junk1" or even "junk".

            RW      tmp/                =   @all

Similar to above, but for *any* authenticated user.

            RW      refs/tags/v[0-9]    =   ashok   # the QA guy

Ashok is allowed to push version tags.  He can push any tag whose name starts
with a "v", then a digit, like "v1", "v1.0", "v2.0rc1", etc., but not "v-1",
"ver1".

### advanced access control

#### "deny" rules

**Warning**: When using deny rules, the order of your rules matters, where
earlier it did not.

PROCESSING LOGIC:

>   The first matching refex that has the permission you're looking for (`W`
>   or `+`) **or a minus (`-`)**, results in success **or failure,
>   respectively**.  A fallthrough **also** results in failure.

        RW refs/tags/v[0-9]     = ashok
        -  refs/tags/v[0-9]     = @staff
        RW refs/tags            = @staff

This allows only Ashok to write "version tags" (see rule for Ashok the QA guy
somewhere above).  The others can write any tags they want, *except* version
tags.  To understand this, try and match each rule *in sequence* with the name
of the tag being pushed, and the user doing it, applying the logic described
earlier.

  * for non-version tags, only the 3rd rule matches, so anyone on staff can
    push them
  * for version tags by bruce, the first rule matches so he can push them
  * for version tags by staffers *other than bruce*, the second rule matches
    before the third one, and it has a `-` as the permission, so the push
    fails

#### personal branches

Personal branches exist **in a namespace** of their own.  The syntax is

        RW  personal/USER/  =   @staff

where the "personal" can be anything you like (but cannot be empty), and the
"/USER/" part is **necessary**.  A user "alice" can then push any branches
inside `personal/alice/`.  Which means she can push `personal/alice/foo` and
`personal/alice/bar`, but NOT `personal/alice`.

#### splitting up rules into rulesets

Rules accumulate.  Even when separated by rules for other repos.  They
accumulate intuitively.  For example:

    repo foo
        RW+             =   alice

    repo bar
        RW+             =   dilbert

    repo @all
        RW  dev/USER/   =   @staff

    repo foo
        RW+ tmp/        =   @staff

has the **effective** ruleset, for repo foo, of

    repo foo
        RW+             =   alice
        RW  dev/USER/   =   @staff
        RW+ tmp/        =   @staff

Just remember that if you use [deny rules][dr] anywhere then the *order of the
rules matters*!

[dr]: http://sitaramc.github.com/gitolite/doc/gitolite.conf.html#_deny_rules

#### gitweb and daemon

Gitolite does NOT do anything for gitweb and daemon access **except**

  * for daemon, create the file `git-daemon-export-ok` in the repository
  * for gitweb, add the repo (plus owner name, if given) to the list of
    projects to be served by gitweb (see the config file variable
    `$PROJECTS_LIST`, which should have the same value you specified for
    `$projects_list` when setting up gitweb)
  * put the description, if given, in `$repo/description`
