## hook propagation in gitolite

Some users like to know how hooks propagate, and when, and why there appear to
be two places to put them, and so on.  I'll try and set out the logic here.

**Note**: This is **not** the document to read if you just want to install a
new custom hook; treat it as more "theory" than "lab".  ([Here][ch] is the
"lab" version!)

[ch]: http://sitaramc.github.com/gitolite/doc/2-admin.html#_custom_hooks

In this document:

  * <a href="#_hooks_used_by_gitolite">hooks used by gitolite</a>
  * <a href="#_where_do_I_the_admin_put_the_hooks_">**where** do I (the admin) put the hooks?</a>
      * <a href="#_the_from_client_method">the "from-client" method</a>
      * <a href="#_the_other_3_methods">the other 3 methods</a>
          * <a href="#_the_GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS_directory">the `GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS` directory</a>
          * <a href="#_the_HOME_gitolite_directory">the `$HOME/.gitolite` directory</a>
      * <a href="#_why_two_places_">why two places?</a>
      * <a href="#_special_case_the_non_root_method">special case: the "non-root" method</a>
  * <a href="#_when_do_hooks_propagate_">**when** do hooks propagate?</a>

<a name="_hooks_used_by_gitolite"></a>

### hooks used by gitolite

Gitolite uses only 2 hooks.  **All** repos have an `update` hook, without
which there is no write-level access control (per-branch permissions).  The
special **gitolite-admin** repo has a special `post-update` hook, which is
required to do its, umm, special things, like running the "compile" script,
etc.

In addition there is a "sentinel file" -- an empty file called
"gitolite-hooked".  We'll see later what this does.

The final objective of all this is that each repo's `hooks/` directory should
get all the hooks that it is meant to get.

<a name="_where_do_I_the_admin_put_the_hooks_"></a>

### **where** do I (the admin) put the hooks?

In general, **all** hooks go into the `hooks/common` directory.  Only the
special `post-update` hook meant for the admin repo goes into
`hooks/gitolite-admin`.

Now we'll discuss the locations of these `hooks/common` and
`hooks/gitolite-admin` directories.  This depends on which install method you
used.

(Please refer to [doc/1-INSTALL.mkd][0inst] for what these "methods" are).

<a name="_the_from_client_method"></a>

#### the "from-client" method

Let's get this out of the way first, because it is simple: if you're using the
"from-client" method, there's only one place: the `hooks` directory in your
gitolite clone on the client side.  This is where you run
`src/gl-easy-install` from.  Nothing else in this section is relevant to this
method; skip to the next section ("when do hooks propagate") if you installed
using the "from-client" method.

<a name="_the_other_3_methods"></a>

#### the other 3 methods

<a name="_the_GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS_directory"></a>

##### the `GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS` directory

You might recall that the "root", and "non-root" methods run a command called
`gl-system-install`, the third argument of which is some directory of your
choice (like maybe `/usr/share/gitolite/hooks`).  Even though it is not
necessary to know this, internally this becomes the value of the
`$GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS` variable, so in this document we will refer to that
variable instead of the location (because you might choose any location you
like for it).

The "package" method also has the same property, except that the packager has
already decided what that location is, and the package creation/install
process does the equivalent of `gl-system-install`.

So now we know there's a location called `$GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS` where you can
place your hooks.

<a name="_the_HOME_gitolite_directory"></a>

##### the `$HOME/.gitolite` directory

You might also recall that, in these three methods, each **hosting user** has
to run `gl-setup`.  This sets up, among other things, `$HOME/.gitolite`
directory, which also contains a `hooks/` directory.

So now there are two places you can put your hooks, apparently.

<a name="_why_two_places_"></a>

#### why two places?

Just think of the "package" and "root" methods for now, even if you're using
the "non-root" method.

In these two methods, it is reasonable to assume that the entire site (or
server) has certain policies that they want to implement using hooks.  They
want to enforce these hooks on *each hosting user*.  These hooks go into
`$GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS`.

Each hosting user then has the discretion to add his own hooks (modulo name
clashes, which may necessitate hook chaining, etc., like we already do for the
hooks that gitolite cares about).  He adds these hooks to his
`$HOME/.gitolite/hooks` directory.

When hooks propagate, the ones in `$GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS` override/overwrite the
ones in `$HOME/.gitolite/hooks`.  Otherwise it wouldn't make sense; you
wouldn't be able to enforce site-wide hooks.

[NOTE: due to a minor quirk, the site-wide hooks in `$GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS` also
get copied to `$HOME/.gitolite/hooks` when you "install".  I need to fix and
thoroughly test this later; for now, just ignore the extra files you see in
there; they're harmless/redundant (TODO)]

<a name="_special_case_the_non_root_method"></a>

#### special case: the "non-root" method

This method was created later, just piggy-backing on everything that already
existed to cater to the "package" and "root" methods.  In this method, the
`$GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS` is as accessible or under your control as
`$HOME/.gitolite`, so it doesn't matter where you put your hooks.

<a name="_when_do_hooks_propagate_"></a>

### **when** do hooks propagate?

First: realise that gitolite *wants to make sure* that all the hooks in your
`hooks/common` directory get copied (symlinked, actually) to *every* repo that
gets created.  **Not doing so is generally a security risk; because the
primary purpose of gitolite is access control, people generally *want* hooks
to run.**

Here's how/when hooks are created/propagated:

1.  anytime you do an install, gitolite trawls through *all* existing repos
    (using the unix `find` command) and force-links all the hooks in all the
    repos so they all get the latest and greatest hooks.

2.  anytime you do a "compile" (meaning push changes to the admin repo),
    gitolite looks through all the repos named in the config.  It first checks
    if the repo exists, creating it if needed.  It then looks for a sentinel
    file called "gitolite-hooked" (an empty file in the hooks directory).  If
    it doesn't find it, it will assume that hooks need to be propagated.

    This is because people often copy a repo from elsewhere, add it to the
    config, and expect things to work.  Without this step, those repos don't
    get the hooks, which is bad -- the access control would have failed
    silently!

3.  anytime a new repo is created, the same force-linking of hooks happens.
    The 3 places a new repo is created are:

      * the "compile" case mentioned above, where the admin added a normal
        repo to the config and pushed

      * the wildrepos case, where you have "C" permissions and the repo does
        not already exist

      * the `fork` command in `contrib/adc`.  In this case the hooks are
        explicitly copied from the source repo using the `cp` command, not
        using the code internal to gitolite.

For people who do not want certain hooks to run for certain repos, one simple
solution that will work right now is to check the value of `$GL_REPO` at the
start of the hook, and `exit 0` based on what it contains/matches.

[0inst]: http://sitaramc.github.com/gitolite/doc/1-INSTALL.html

