## idiot-proof setup for gitolite

WARNING 1: this document uses my new, Linus-inspired, motto: people who get
offended, *should* be offended.

WARNING 2: contains more words in ALL CAPS than all my other documents put
together.

WARNING 3: this document will work for any Linux on which git has already been
installed.  BSDs, or legacy systems like Solaris, also should work but I can't
guarantee it or test it.

----

Some people seem to get terribly, **terribly** confused by ssh.  If you've
read through all the [documentation on ssh][ssh] that came with gitolite, yet
you *still* cannot get things to work, you have two choices:

1.  exchange your "developer" badge for a "manager" badge and then hire
    someone to do this.

2.  start over with the instructions below.  They include some DRASTIC
    measures, requirements, and restrictions, almost NONE of which are
    normally necessary, but it's either that or a suit and tie from tomorrow
    so play along.

**IMPORTANT**: Do NOT ask for help on these instructions unless you have kept
a detailed log of every command you typed, and the complete response you got.
I do not ask for this information to help you -- that's only a front.  I
*know* these instructions work (at least on any Linux that already has git
installed), so the real reason is to find where you mistyped something and
mock you for that,

### Assumptions

  * your name is Ron.  Substitute accordingly in the instructions below.

  * you have a workstation.

  * you have a server called `server`.

  * you have root access on this server.

### Tasks

1.  Create a new userid on the server, say `git`.  This will be the **hosting
    user**.  ("hosting user" means when you're done installing, your users
    will use URLs like `git@server:reponame` or `ssh://git@server/reponame`).

    **Make sure this is a NEW userid**.

    If the name you want already exists, then:

      * log in as root
      * if you have any data on that user's HOME directory save it somewhere
        else
      * delete the userid
      * obliterate the home directory of the user (since on most systems
        merely deleting the user does not remove the home directory).
      * re-create the userid again

2.  If you don't already have one, make yourself an ssh keypair **on your
    workstation**.

    Do NOT, in a fit of inspiration and energy, add this public key to the
    authorised keys file on the newly created hosting user!

    Your ONLY access to the new (`git`) userid should be by logging onto the
    server as root, then running `su - git`.

3.  Now copy the pubkey from your workstation (`~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`) to the
    server as `/tmp/ron.pub`.  (Your name is Ron, remember?)

4.  Log on to the server as root.

5.  Switch to the `git` user:

        su - git

6.  Clone the gitolite source code

        git clone git://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite

7.  Install it

        cd $HOME
        mkdir -p bin
        gitolite/install -to $HOME/bin

8.  Set it up

        cd $HOME
        $HOME/bin/gitolite setup -pk /tmp/ron.pub

9.  Now go to your workstation and type in

        git ls-remote git@server:gitolite-admin

    This should return something like

        9dd8aab60bac5e54ccf887a87b4f3d35c96b05e4    HEAD
        9dd8aab60bac5e54ccf887a87b4f3d35c96b05e4    refs/heads/master

    (do I have to mention that your SHAs will be different?)
