## packaging gitolite

Here's how you'd package gitolite.  In the following description, location "X"
can be, say, `/usr/share/gitolite/conf` or some such, and similarly location
"Y" can be perhaps `/usr/share/gitolite/hooks`.  It's upto your distro
policies where they are.

**Step 1**: Clone the gitolite repo and run the make command inside the clone

    git clone git://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite.git
    cd gitolite
    make pu.tar     # or "make master.tar" or "make v1.2.tar" etc

Then you explode the tar file in some temporary location.

*Alternatively, you can `git checkout` the tag or branch you want, and run
this command in the clone directly*:

    git describe --tags --long > conf/VERSION

**Step 2**: Now make the following changes (no trailing slashes in the
location values please):

  * `src/gl-setup` should have the following line:

        GL_PACKAGE_CONF="X"

  * `conf/example.gitolite.rc` should have the following lines:

        $GL_PACKAGE_CONF="X";
        $GL_PACKAGE_HOOKS="Y";

  * delete `src/gl-easy-install`; that script is meant for a totally different
    mode of installation and does *not* play well in this mode :-)

**Step 3**: Move (or arrange to move) the files to their proper locations as
given below:

  * everything in "src" goes somewhere on the PATH
  * everything in "conf" goes to location "X"
  * everything in "hooks" goes to location "Y"

**Step 4**: There is no step 4.  Unless you count telling your users to run
`gl-setup` as a step :)

On the initial install (urpmi, yum install, or apt-get install), you could
also choose to setup a userid called "gitolite", and run "gl-setup" as that
user; however I do not know how you would come up with the initial pubkey that
is needed.  Anyway, the point is that the "gitolite" user is no more special
than any other in terms of hosting gitolite.  Any user can host gitolite on
his userid by just running "gl-setup".

When you upgrade, just overwrite all the files; it'll all just work.  In fact,
other than the initial "gl-setup" run, the only time a gitolite hosting user
has to actually do anything is to edit their own `~/.gitolite.rc` file if they
want to enable or disable specific features.
