# quick install, setup, and clone

## ASSUMPTIONS

  * This is an ssh-based setup.  For smart http setup click [here][http].

  * This is a fresh install, not a migration from the old gitolite (v1.x,
    v2.x).

  * On the server, `$HOME/bin` exists and is in your `$PATH`.  If you don't
    like that, there are [other install methods][install].

  * "your-name.pub" is your public key from your workstation.
      * Also, this key does not already have shell access to this gitolite
        hosting user.

  * The setup command does not generate any warnings.
      * If it does, please see [common errors][ce] and fix things before
        continuing, or read the more complete [setup][] page.

## instructions

On the server, as the hosting user (e.g., 'git'):

    # get the software
    git clone git://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite

    # install it
    gitolite/install -ln

    # setup the initial repos with your key
    gitolite setup -pk your-name.pub

On your workstation:

    # clone the admin repo so you can start adding stuff
    git clone git@host:gitolite-admin.git
    # Note 1: clone path must not include "repositories/"
    # Note 2: it may include the ".git" at the end but it is optional

## next steps

If this step succeeds, you can add [users][], [repos][], or anything else
described [here][adminrepo].

If this step fails, be sure to look at the [ssh][] documentation before asking
for help.  (A very basic first step is to run `ssh git@host info`;
[this][info] page tells you what to expect).
