# adding and removing repos

>   ----

>   *WARNING: Do NOT add repos directly on the server.  Clone the
>   'gitolite-admin' repo to your workstation, make changes to it, then add,
>   commit, and push.  When the push hits the server, the server "acts" upon
>   your changes.*

>   ----

Just as for [users][], all operations are in a clone of the gitolite-admin
repo.

To **add** a new repo, edit `conf/gitolite.conf` and add it, along with at
least one user with some permissions.  Or add it to an existing repo line:

    repo gitolite tsh gitpod
        RW+     =   sitaram
        RW  dev =   alice bob
        R       =   @all

The "repo" line can have any number of repo names or repo group names in it.
However, it can only be one line; this will not work

    repo foo
    repo bar    # WRONG; 'foo' is now forgotten
        RW      =   alice

If you have too many, use a group name:

    @myrepos    =   foo
    @myrepos    =   bar

    repo @myrepos
        RW      =   alice

Finally, you add, commit, and push this change.  Gitolite will create a bare,
empty, repo on the server that is ready to be cloned.

**Removing** a repo is not so straightforward.  You certainly must remove the
appropriate lines from the `conf/gitolite.conf` file, but gitolite will not
automatically delete the repo from the server.  You have to log on to the
server and do the dirty deed yourself :-)

It is best to make the change in the conf file, push it, and *then* go to the
server and do what you need to.

**Renaming** a repo is also not automatic.  Here's what you do (and the order
is important):

  * go to the server and rename the repo at the Unix command line
  * change the name in the conf/gitolite.conf file and add/commit/push.
