# F=support support for gitolite

Email addresses etc are in the "contact and license" section at the bottom of
the [main](http://sitaramc.github.com/gitolite/) document.

If you're willing to read, you will only need support for the most obscure
issues.  I often don't bother responding for silly issues that are already in
the docs.  Seriously, folks, troubleshooting involves reading; do I really
need to *say* that?

  * Lost your admin key?  Try [gl-admin-push][adminpush].

  * For install/setup issues see the [install trouble?][insttrouble] section
    of the [install][] document.

    In particular, that section has two links for ssh issues.  **I've yet to
    see an ssh problem that is not already covered by those** (but please tell
    me if you find one!)

  * The [suggested reading list][rtfm] section is a quick overview of the
    documentation.

  * If you still can't find what you need, try the [**master index/table of
    contents**](http://sitaramc.github.com/gitolite/master-toc.html) and use
    your browser's search function.

----

**Note on the online docs**: the online docs break up longer documents by
putting less "central" concepts into subdocuments (replacing the text with a
link so you know it's there).  I did this because the most frequent complaint
was "TL;DR" (your documentation is too long); I do believe it is now easier to
find things/navigate.

<font color="gray">Of course, now someone complained that it took him "4
middle-of-text clicks" to reach some section... sigh!</font>
