# virtual refs

**IMPORTANT**: fallthru is success in VREFs, unlike the normal refs.  That
won't make sense until you read further, but I had to put it up here for folks
who stop reading halfway!

----

Here's an example to start you off.

    repo    r1
        RW+                         =   lead_dev dev2 dev3
        -   VREF/COUNT/9            =   dev2 dev3
        -   VREF/COUNT/3/NEWFILES   =   dev2 dev3

Now dev2 and dev3 cannot push changes that affect more than 9 files at a time,
nor those that have more than 3 new files.

Another example is detecting duplicate pubkeys in a push to the admin repo:

    repo gitolite-admin
        # ... normal rules ...
        -   VREF/DUPKEYS            =   @all

----

## rule matching recap

You won't get any joy out of this if you don't understand at least
[refex][]es and how [rules][] are processed.

But VREFs have one **very important difference** from normal rules.  With
VREFs, a **fallthru results in success**.  You'll see why this is more
convenient as you read on.

----

## what is a virtual ref

A ref like `refs/heads/master` is the main property of a push that gitolite
uses to make its yes/no decision.  I call this a "real" ref.

Any *other* property of the push that you want to use to help in the decision
is therefore a *virtual* ref.  This could be a property that git knows about,
like in the example above, or comes from outside git like, say, the current
time; see examples section later for some ideas.

## #vref-fallthru fallthru is success here

Notice that you didn't need to add an `RW+ VREF/...` rule for user `lead_dev`
in our example.  This section explains why.

**Virtual refs are best used as additional "deny" rules**, performing extra
checks that core gitolite cannot.

Making fallthru be a "fail" forces you to add rules for all users, instead of
just the ones who should have those extra checks.  Worse, since every virtual
ref involves calling an external program, many of these calls may be wasted.

There's another advantage to doing it this way: a VREF can choose to simply
die if things look bad, and it will have the same effect, assuming you used
the VREF only in "deny" rules.

This in turn means any existing update hook can be used as a VREF *as-is*, as
long as it (a) prints nothing on success and (b) dies on failure.  See the
email-check and dupkeys examples later.

## how it works -- overview

Briefly, a refex starting with `VREF/FOO` triggers a call to a program called
`FOO` in `$GL_BINDIR/VREF`.

That program is expected to print zero or more lines to its STDOUT; each line
that starts with `VREF/` is taken by gitolite as a new "ref" to be matched
against all the refexes for this user in the config.  Including the refex that
caused the vref call, of course.

Normally, you send back the refex itself, if the test determines that the rule
should be matched, otherwise nothing.  So, in our example, we print
`VREF/COUNT/9` if the count was indeed greater than 9.  Otherwise we just
exit.

## how it works -- details

  * The VREF code is only called if there are any VREF rules for the user,
    which means when the lead developer pushes, the VREF is not called at all.

    Side note: this is enormously more efficient than adding additional
    `update` hooks, which will get executed whether they are needed or not,
    for every repo and every user!

  * When dev2 or dev3 push, gitolite first checks the real ref
    (`ref/heads/master` or whatever).  After this it looks at VREF rules, and
    calls an external program for every one it finds.  Specifically, in a line
    like

           -   VREF/COUNT/3/NEWFILES    =   user

    COUNT is the vref name, so the program called is
    `$GL_BINDIR/VREF/COUNT`.

    The program is passed **nine arguments** in this case (see next section
    for details).

  * The script can print anything it wants to STDOUT.  Lines not starting with
    `VREF/` are printed as is (so your VREF can do mostly-normal printing to
    STDOUT).

    For lines starting with `VREF/`, the first word in each such line will be
    treated as a virtual ref to be matched against all the rules, while the
    rest, if any, is a message to be added to the standard "...DENIED..."
    message that gitolite prints if that refex matches.

    Usually it only makes sense to either

      * Print nothing that starts with `VREF/` -- if you don't want the rule
        that triggered it to match (ie., whatever condition being tested was
        not violated; like if the count of changed files did not exceed 9, in
        our earlier example).
      * Print the refex itself (plus an optional message), so that it matches
        the line which invoked it.

### arguments passed to the vref code

  * Arguments **1, 2, 3**: the 'ref', 'oldsha', and 'newsha' that git passed
    to the update hook (see 'man githooks').

    This, combined with the fact that non-zero exits are detected, mean that
    you can simply use an existing update.secondary as a new VREF as-is, no
    changes needed.

  * Arguments **4 and 5**: the 'oldtree' and 'newtree' SHAs.  These are the
    same as the oldsha and newsha values, except if one of them is all-0.
    (indicating a ref creation or deletion).  In that case the corresponding
    'tree' SHA is set (by gitolite, as a courtesy) to the special SHA
    `4b825dc642cb6eb9a060e54bf8d69288fbee4904`, which is the hash of an empty
    tree.

    (None of these shenanigans would have been needed if `git diff $oldsha
    $newsha` would not error out when passed an all-0 SHA.)

  * Argument **6**: the attempted access flag.  Typically `W` or `+`, but
    could also be `C`, `D`, or any of these 4 followed by `M`.  If you have to
    ask what they mean, you haven't read enough gitolite documentation to be
    able to make virtual refs work.

  * Argument **7**: is the entire refex; in our example
    `VREF/COUNT/3/NEWFILES`.

  * Arguments **8 onward**: are the split out (by `/`) portions of the refex,
    excluding the first two components.  In our example they would be `3`
    followed by `NEWFILES`.

Yes, argument 7 is redundant if you have 8 and 9.  It's meant to make it easy
to write vref scripts in any language.  See script examples in source.

## what (else) can the vref code pass back

Actually, the vref code can pass anything back; each line in its output that
starts with `VREF/` will be matched against all the rules as usual (with the
exception that fallthru is not failure).

For example, you could have a ruleset like this:

    repo r1
        # ... normal rules ...

        -   VREF/TIME/WEEKEND       =   @interns
        -   VREF/TIME/WEEKNIGHT     =   @interns
        -   VREF/TIME/HOLIDAY       =   @interns

and you could write the TIME vref code to passback any or all
of the times that match.  Then if an intern tried to access the system, each
rule would trigger a call to gl-bindir/VREF/TIME.

The script should send back any of the applicable times (even more than one,
or none at all, as the case may be).  So even if it was invoked using the
first rule, it might pass back (to gitolite) a virtual ref saying
'VREF/TIME/HOLIDAY', which would promptly cause the request to be denied.

## VREFs shipped with gitolite

### #NAME restricting pushes by dir/file name

The "NAME" VREF allows you to restrict pushes by the names of dirs and files
changed.

Here's an example.  Say you don't want junior developers pushing changes to
the Makefile, because it's quite complex:

    repo foo
            RW+                             =   @senior_devs
            RW                              =   @junior_devs

            -   VREF/NAME/Makefile          =   @junior_devs

When a senior dev pushes, the VREF is not invoked at all.  But when a junior
dev pushes, the VREF is invoked, and it returns a list of files changed **as
refs**, looking like this:

    VREF/NAME/file-1
    VREF/NAME/dir-2/file-3
    ...etc...

Each of these refs is matched against the access rules.  If one of them
happens to be the Makefile, then the ref returned (VREF/NAME/Makefile) will
match the deny rule and kill the push.

Another way to use this is when you know what is allowed instead of what is
not allowed.  Let's say the QA person is only allowed to touch a file called
CHANGELOG and any files in a directory called ReleaseNotes:

    repo foo
            RW+                             =   @senior_devs
            RW                              =   @junior_devs
            RW+                             =   QA-guy

            RW+ VREF/NAME/CHANGELOG         =   QA-guy
            RW+ VREF/NAME/ReleaseNotes/     =   QA-guy
            -   VREF/NAME/                  =   QA-guy

### number of new files

The COUNT VREF is used like this:

    -   VREF/COUNT/9                    =   @junior-developers

In response, if anyone in the user list pushes a commit series that
changes more than 9 files, a vref of "VREF/COUNT/9" is returned.  Gitolite
uses that as a "ref" to match against all the rules, hits the same rule
that invoked it, and denies the request.

If the user did not push more than 9 files, the VREF code returns nothing,
and nothing happens.

COUNT can take one more argument:

    -   VREF/COUNT/9/NEWFILES           =   @junior-developers

This is the same as before, but have to be more than 9 *new* files not
just changed files.

### advanced filetype detection

Note: this is more for illustration than use; it's rather specific to one of
the projects I manage but the idea is the important thing.

Sometimes a file has a standard extension (that cannot be 'gitignore'd), but
it is actually automatically generated.  Here's one way to catch it:

     -   VREF/FILETYPE/AUTOGENERATED     =   @all

You can look at `src/VREF/FILETYPE` to see how it handles the
'AUTOGENERATED' option.  You could also have a more generic option, like
perhaps BINARY, and handle that in the FILETYPE vref too.

### checking author email

Some people want to ensure that "you can only push your own commits".

If you force it on everyone, this is a very silly idea (see "Philosophical
Notes" section of `src/VREF/EMAIL-CHECK`).

But there may be value in enforcing it just for the junior developers.

The neat thing is that the existing `contrib/update.email-check` was just
copied to `src/VREF/EMAIL-CHECK` and it works, because VREFs get
the same first 3 arguments and those are all that it cares about.  (Note: you
have to change one subroutine in that script if you want to use it)

### catching duplicate pubkeys

This checks keydir/ for duplicate keys and aborts the push if it finds any.
You should use this only on the gitolite-admin repo.

We covered this as a teaser example at the start.

## other ideas -- code welcome!

### "no non-merge first-parents"

Shruggar on #gitolite wanted this.  Possible code to implement it would be
something like this (untested)

    [ -z "$(git rev-list --first-parent --no-merges $2..$3)" ]

This can be implemented using `src/VREF/MERGE-CHECK` as a model.  That script
does what the 'M' qualifier does in access rules (see last part of
[this][write-types]), although the syntax to be used in conf/gitolite will be
quite different.

### other ideas for VREFs

Here are some more ideas:

  * Number of commits (`git rev-list --count $old $new`).
  * Number of binary files in commit (currently I only know to count
    occurrences of ` Bin ` in the output of `git diff --stat`.
  * Number of *new* binary files (count ` Bin 0 ->` in `git diff --stat`
    output).
  * Time of day/day of week (see example snippet somewhere above).
  * IP address.
  * Phase of the moon.

Note that pretty much anything that involves `$oldsha..$newsha` will have to
deal with the issue that when you push a new tag or branch, the "old" part
is all 0's, and unless you consider `--all` existing branches and tags it
becomes meaningless in terms of "number of new files" etc.
