# "wild" repos (user created repos)

## quick introduction

The wildrepos feature allows you to specify access control rules using regular
expression patterns, so you can have many actual repos being served by a
single set of rules in the config file.  The regex pattern can also include
the word `CREATOR` in it, allowing you to parametrise the name of the user
creating the repo.

See the section on "repo patterns" later for additional information on what
counts as a "wild" repo pattern and how it is matched.

## (admin) declaring wild repos in the conf file

Here's an example:

    @prof       =   u1
    @TAs        =   u2 u3
    @students   =   u4 u5 u6

    repo    assignments/CREATOR/a[0-9][0-9]
        C   =   @students
        RW+ =   CREATOR
        RW  =   WRITERS @TAs
        R   =   READERS @prof

Note the "C" permission.  This is a standalone "C", which gives the named
users the right to *create a repo*.  <font color="gray">This is not to be
confused with the "RWC" or its variants described elsewhere, which are about
*branches*, not *repos*.</font>

## #create (user) creating a specific repo

For now, ignore the special usernames READERS and WRITERS, and just create a
new repo, as user "u4" (a student):

    $ git clone git@server:assignments/u4/a12
    Initialized empty Git repository in /home/sitaram/a12/.git/
    Initialized empty Git repository in /home/git/repositories/assignments/u4/a12.git/
    warning: You appear to have cloned an empty repository.

Notice the *two* empty repo inits, and the order in which they occur ;-)

## a slightly different example

Here's how the same example would look if you did not want the CREATOR's name
to be part of the actual repo name.

    repo    assignments/a[0-9][0-9]
        C   =   @students
        RW+ =   CREATOR
        RW  =   WRITERS @TAs
        R   =   READERS @prof

We haven't changed anything except the repo name pattern.  This means that the
first student that creates, say, `assignments/a12` becomes the owner.
Mistakes (such as claiming a12 instead of a13) need to be rectified by an
admin logging on to the back end, though it's not too difficult.

You could also repace the C line like this:

        C   =   @TAs

and have a TA create the repos in advance.

## repo patterns

### pattern versus normal repo

Due to projects like `gtk+`, the `+` character is now considered a valid
character for an *ordinary* repo.  Therefore, a pattern like `foo/.+` does not
look like a regex to gitolite.  Use `foo/..*` if you want that.

Also, `..*` by itself is not considered a valid repo pattern.  Try
`[a-zA-Z0-9].*`.

### line-anchored regexes

A regex like

    repo assignments/S[0-9]+/A[0-9]+

would match `assignments/S02/A37`.  It will not match `assignments/S02/ABC`,
or `assignments/S02/a37`, obviously.

But you may be surprised to find that it does not match even
`assignments/S02/A37/B99`.  This is because internally, gitolite
*line-anchors* the given regex; so that regex actually becomes
`^assignments/S[0-9]+/A[0-9]+$` -- notice the line beginning and ending
metacharacters.

Side-note: contrast with refexes

>   Just for interest, note that this is in contrast to the refexes for the >
>   normal "branch" permissions, as described in `doc/gitolite.conf.mkd` and
>   elsewhere.  These "refexes" are only anchored at the start; a pattern like
>   `refs/heads/master` actually can match `refs/heads/master01/bar` as well,
>   even if no one will actually push such a branch!  You can anchor both
>   sides if you really care, by using `master$` instead of `master`, but that
>   is *not* the default for refexes.

## roles

The tokens READERS and WRITERS are called "role" names.  The access rules that
the admin specifies say what permissions these roles have, but they don't say
what users are in these roles.

That needs to be done by the creator of the repo, using the `perms` command.
You can run `ssh git@host perms -h` for detailed help, but in brief, that
command lets you give and take away roles to users.

## adding other roles

If you want to have more than just the 2 default roles, say something like:

    repo foo/..*
      C                 =   u1
      RW    refs/tags/  =   TESTERS
      -     refs/tags/  =   @all
      RW+               =   WRITERS
      RW                =   INTERNS
      R                 =   READERS
      RW+D              =   MANAGERS

You can add the new names to the ROLES hash in the [rc][] file.  Be sure to
run the 2 commands mentioned there after you have added the roles.
file.  The rc file documentation (`doc/gitolite.rc.mkd`) explains how.

#### #rolenamewarn **IMPORTANT WARNING ABOUT THIS FEATURE**

Please make sure that none of the role names conflict with any of the user
names or group names in the system.  For example, if you have a user called
"foo" or a group called "@foo", make sure you do not include "foo" as a valid
role in the ROLES hash.

You can keep things sane by using UPPERCASE names for roles, while keeping all
your user and group names lowercase; then you don't have to worry about this
problem.

## listing wild repos

In order to see what repositories were created from a wildcard, use the 'info'
command.  Try `ssh git@host info -h` to get help on the info command.

## deleting a wild repo

TBD
