## repositories named with wildcards

***IMPORTANT NOTE***:

This feature may be somewhat "brittle" in terms of security.  Creating
repositories based on wild cards, giving "ownership" to the specific user who
created it, allowing him/her to hand out permissions to other users to
collaborate, all these are possible.  And any of these could have a bug in it.
I haven't found any yet, but that doesn't mean there aren't any.

----

In this document:

  * <a href="#_quick_introduction">quick introduction</a>
  * <a href="#_rc_file_setting_required">rc file setting required</a>
  * <a href="#_examples_of_wildcard_repos">examples of wildcard repos</a>
      * <a href="#_wildcard_repos_with_creator_name_in_them">wildcard repos with creator name in them</a>
      * <a href="#_wildcard_repos_without_creator_name_in_them">wildcard repos without creator name in them</a>
  * <a href="#_side_note_valid_regexes">side-note: valid regexes</a>
  * <a href="#_side_note_line_anchored_regexes">side-note: line-anchored regexes</a>
      * <a href="#_contrast_with_refexes">contrast with refexes</a>
  * <a href="#_handing_out_rights_to_wildcard_matched_repos">handing out rights to wildcard-matched repos</a>
  * <a href="#_admin_adding_other_roles_than_READERS_and_WRITERS">(admin) adding other roles than READERS and WRITERS</a>
      * <a href="#_IMPORTANT_WARNING_ABOUT_THIS_FEATURE_">**IMPORTANT WARNING ABOUT THIS FEATURE**</a>
  * <a href="#_setting_a_gitweb_description_for_a_wildcard_matched_repo">setting a gitweb description for a wildcard-matched repo</a>
  * <a href="#_reporting">reporting</a>
  * <a href="#_deleting_a_wild_repo">deleting a wild repo</a>
  * <a href="#_how_it_actually_works">how it actually works</a>

----

This document is mostly "by example".

----

<a name="_quick_introduction"></a>

### quick introduction

The wildrepos feature allows you to specify access control rules using regular
expression patterns, so you can have many actual repos being served by a
single set of rules in the config file.  The regex pattern can also include
the word `CREATOR` in it, allowing you to parametrise the name of the user
creating the repo.  The examples below will make this clearer.

<a name="_rc_file_setting_required"></a>

### rc file setting required

This feature requires that you set `$GL_WILDREPOS` to "1" in `~/.gitolite.rc`
on the server.  Please search for that variable in `doc/gitolite.rc.mkd`
for more information on this.

<a name="_examples_of_wildcard_repos"></a>

### examples of wildcard repos

As the introduction said, you can include the word `CREATOR` in the regex
pattern, though it is not mandatory.  We'll look at examples of both types of
usage.

Which of these alternatives you choose depends on your needs, and the social
aspects of your environment.  Including the creator name in the pattern keeps
users rigidly separated from each others repos, and is good for a largely
autonomous collection of users with a high probability of repo name clashes.

Omitting the creator name from the pattern puts the repos in a common
namespace, and is suitable for environments where it is not very important to
keep track of who actually created the repo (except for granting access), but
needs more communication / co-operation among the users to avoid repo name
clashes.

<a name="_wildcard_repos_with_creator_name_in_them"></a>

#### wildcard repos with creator name in them

Here's an example snippet:

    @prof       =   u1
    @TAs        =   u2 u3
    @students   =   u4 u5 u6

    repo    assignments/CREATOR/a[0-9][0-9]
        C   =   @students
        RW+ =   CREATOR
        RW  =   WRITERS @TAs
        R   =   READERS @prof

For now, ignore the special usernames READERS and WRITERS, and just create a
new repo, as user "u4" (a student):

    $ git clone git@server:assignments/u4/a12
    Initialized empty Git repository in /home/sitaram/t/a12/.git/
    Initialized empty Git repository in /home/gitolite/repositories/assignments/u4/a12.git/
    warning: You appear to have cloned an empty repository.

Notice the *two* empty repo inits, and the order in which they occur ;-)

<a name="_wildcard_repos_without_creator_name_in_them"></a>

#### wildcard repos without creator name in them

Here's how the same example would look if you did not want the CREATOR's name
to be part of the actual repo name.

    repo    assignments/a[0-9][0-9]
        C   =   @students
        RW+ =   CREATOR
        RW  =   WRITERS @TAs
        R   =   READERS @prof

We haven't changed anything except the repo name pattern.  This means that the
first student that creates, say, `assignments/a12` becomes the owner.
Mistakes (such as claiming a12 instead of a13) need to be rectified by an
admin logging on to the back end, though it's not too difficult.

You could also repace the C line like this:

        C   =   @TAs

and have a TA create the repos in advance.

In either case, they could then use the `setperms` feature to specify which
users are "READERS" and which are "WRITERS".  See later for details.

<a name="_side_note_valid_regexes"></a>

### side-note: valid regexes

Due to projects like `gtk+`, the `+` character is now considered a valid
character for an *ordinary* repo.  Therefore, a pattern like `foo/.+` does not
look like a regex to gitolite.  Use `foo/..*` if you want that.

Also, `..*` by itself is not considered a valid repo pattern.  Try
`[a-zA-Z0-9].*`.

<a name="_side_note_line_anchored_regexes"></a>

### side-note: line-anchored regexes

A regex like

    repo assignments/S[0-9]+/A[0-9]+

would match `assignments/S02/A37`.  It will not match `assignments/S02/ABC`,
or `assignments/S02/a37`, obviously.

But you may be surprised to find that it does not match even
`assignments/S02/A37/B99`.  This is because internally, gitolite
*line-anchors* the given regex; so that regex actually becomes
`^assignments/S[0-9]+/A[0-9]+$` -- notice the line beginning and ending
metacharacters.

<a name="_contrast_with_refexes"></a>

#### contrast with refexes

Just for interest, note that this is in contrast to the refexes for the normal
"branch" permissions, as described in `doc/gitolite.conf.mkd` and elsewhere.
These "refexes" are only anchored at the start; a pattern like
`refs/heads/master` actually can match `refs/heads/master01/bar` as well, even
if no one will actually push such a branch!  You can anchor both sides if you
really care, by using `master$` instead of `master`, but that is *not* the
default for refexes.

<a name="_handing_out_rights_to_wildcard_matched_repos"></a>

### handing out rights to wildcard-matched repos

In the examples above, we saw two special "user" names: READERS and WRITERS.
The permissions they have are controlled by the config file, but ***who is
part of this list*** is controlled by the person who created the repository.

The use case is that, although our toy example has only 3 students, in reality
there will be a few dozen, but each assignment will be worked on only by a
handful from among those.  This allows the creator to take ad hoc sets of
users from among the actual users in the system, and give them one of two
roles (in this example, READERS and WRITERS respectively).  In theory you
could do the same thing by creating lots of little "assignment-NN" groups in
the config file but that may be a little too cumbersome for non-secret
environments.

Create a small text file that contains the permissions you desire:

    $ cat > myperms
    READERS u5
    WRITERS u6
    (hit ctrl-d here)

...and use the new "setperms" command to set permissions for your repo:

    $ ssh git@server setperms assignments/u4/a12 < myperms
    New perms are:
    READERS u5
    WRITERS u6

'setperms' will helpfully print what the new permissions are but you can also
use 'getperms' to check:

    $ ssh git@server getperms assignments/u4/a12
    READERS u5
    WRITERS u6

The following points are important:

  * note the syntax of the commands; it's not a "git" command, and there's no
    `:` like in a repo URL.  The first space-separated word is READERS or
    WRITERS, and the rest are simple usernames.

<a name="_admin_adding_other_roles_than_READERS_and_WRITERS"></a>

### (admin) adding other roles than READERS and WRITERS

Let's say your needs are more complex and you need more roles.  For example,
you might like to have a setup where only a tester can update tags, and only a
manager can delete branches:

    repo foo/..*
      C                 =   u1
      RW    refs/tags/  =   TESTERS
      -     refs/tags/  =   @all
      RW+               =   WRITERS
      RW                =   INTERNS
      R                 =   READERS
      RW+D              =   MANAGERS

As you can see, someone pre-creates the repo and assigns rights to various
people, say by sending something like this to `setperms`:

    READERS wally
    WRITERS dilbert alice
    MANAGERS phb
    INTERNS ashok
    TESTERS ashok

You can enable this by setting the `GL_WILDREPOS_PERM_CATS` variable in the rc
file.  The rc file documentation (`doc/gitolite.rc.mkd`) explains how.

<a name="_IMPORTANT_WARNING_ABOUT_THIS_FEATURE_"></a>

#### **IMPORTANT WARNING ABOUT THIS FEATURE**

Please make sure that none of the role names conflict with any of the
**usernames** in the system.  For example, if you have a user called "foo",
make sure you do not include "foo" as a valid role in
`$GL_WILDREPOS_PERM_CATS`.

You can keep things sane by using UPPERCASE names for roles, while keeping all
your usernames lowercase; then you don't have to worry about this problem.

<a name="_setting_a_gitweb_description_for_a_wildcard_matched_repo"></a>

### setting a gitweb description for a wildcard-matched repo

Similar to the getperms/setperms commands, there are the getdesc/setdesc
commands, thanks to Teemu.

<a name="_reporting"></a>

### reporting

In order to see what repositories were created from a wildcard, use the
"expand" command, described briefly in [doc/report-output.mkd][repout].

<a name="_deleting_a_wild_repo"></a>

### deleting a wild repo

See [repo deletion][rmr] for more on this.  Note that this requires you to
install/setup "adc"s (admin defined commands).  See
[doc/admin-defined-commands.mkd][adc] for how to do that.

[adc]: http://sitaramc.github.com/gitolite/doc/admin-defined-commands.html
[rmr]: http://sitaramc.github.com/gitolite/contrib/adc/repo-deletion.html

<a name="_how_it_actually_works"></a>

### how it actually works

This section tells you what is happening inside gitolite so you can understand
this feature better.  Let's use the config example at the beginning of this
document:

    repo    assignments/CREATOR/a[0-9][0-9]
        C   =   @students
        RW+ =   CREATOR
        RW  =   WRITERS @TAs
        R   =   READERS @prof

First we find the set of rules to apply.  This involves replacing the special
words CREATOR, WRITERS, and READERS with appropriate usernames to derive an
"effective" ruleset for the repo in question.

For a **new** repo, replace the word CREATOR in all repo patterns and rules
with the name of the invoking user.

>   (Note: this is why you should never use `C = CREATOR`; it becomes `C =
>   invoking_user`!  Unless you really want to allow *all* users to create
>   repos, you should restrict "C" perms to an actual user or set of users,
>   like in the examples in this document).

For an **existing** repo, do the same but replace with the name of the user
who actually *created* the repo (this name is recorded in a special file in
the repo directory when the repo is first created, so it is available).

Now find a repo pattern that matches the actual reponame being pushed -- this
tells you which set of rules to apply.  There can be multiple matches; if so,
they will all be applied in the sequence they appear in the config file.

If the invoking user has been given the "WRITERS" role using `setperms`, all
permissions for the the user WRITERS are given to the invoking username (and
similarly for READERS).

At this point we have an effective ruleset, and the normal access rules (R,
RW, etc) apply, with the addition that the invoking user needs "C" access to
be able to create a repo.

>   (Note: "C" rights do not automatically give the CREATOR any other rights;
>   they must be specifically given.  `RW+ = CREATOR` is recommended in most
>   situations, as you can see in our example).

Assuming user "u4" trying to push-create a new repo called
`assignments/u4/a23`, this is what the effective ruleset looks like:

    repo    assignments/u4/a23
        C   =   @students
        RW+ =   u4
        RW  =   @TAs
        R   =   @prof

If u4 gives u5 the "WRITERS" role using `setperms`, and u5 tries to access
that repo, the ruleset looks like:

    repo    assignments/u4/a23
        C   =   @students
        RW+ =   u4
        RW  =   u5 @TAs
        R   =   @prof

I hope that helps.

----

Enjoy, and please use with care.  This is pretty powerful stuff.  As they say:
if you break it, you get to keep both pieces :)

[repout]: http://sitaramc.github.com/gitolite/doc/report-output.html
